Since chatbots are still a relatively new technology, there is debate around the amount and classification of the available types. However, some common types of chatbots include:
Scripted or quick reply chatbots - These are the most basic chatbots; they act as a hierarchical decision tree. These bots interact with users through a set of predefined questions that progress until the chatbot has answered the user's question. Similar to this chatbot is the menu-based chatbot that requires users to make selections from a predefined list, or menu, to provide the bot with a deeper understanding of what the customer is looking for.
Keyword recognition-based chatbots - These chatbots are a bit more complex; they attempt to listen to what the user types and respond accordingly using keywords picked up from customer responses. Customizable key words and AI are combined in this bot to provide an appropriate response to users. Unfortunately, these chatbots struggle when faced with repetitive keyword use or redundant questions.
Hybrid chatbots - These chatbots combine elements of menu-based and keyword recognition-based bots. Users can choose to have their questions answered directly, but can also access the chatbot's menu to make selections if the keyword recognition process produces ineffective results.
Contextual chatbots - These chatbots are more complex than those listed above and require a data-centric focus. They use ML and AI to remember conversations and interactions with users, and then use these memories to grow and improve over time. Instead of relying on keywords, these bots use what customers ask for and how they ask it to provide answers and self-improve.
Voice-enabled chatbots - This type of chatbot is the future of chatbot technology. Voice-enabled chatbots use spoken dialogue from users as input that prompts responses or creative tasks. They can be created using text-to-speech (TTS) and voice recognition application program interfaces (APIs). Current examples include Amazon Alexa and Apple's Siri.
Examples of chatbot uses
Chatbot use is on the rise, both in the business and consumer markets. As chatbots improve, consumers have less to quarrel about while interacting with them. Between advanced technology and a societal transition to more passive, text-based communication, chatbots help fill a niche that phone calls used to fill.
Chatbots have been used in instant messaging applications and online interactive games for many years, but have recently segued into B2C and B2B sales and services. Chatbots can be added to a buddy list or provide a single game player with an entity to interact with while awaiting other "live" players. If the bot is sophisticated enough to pass the Turing test, the person may not even know they are interacting with a computer program.
In sales, chatbots are being used to assist consumers shopping online, either by answering noncomplex product questions or providing helpful information that the consumer could later search for, including shipping price and availability. Chatbots are also used in service departments, assisting service agents in answering repetitive requests. Once a conversation gets too complex for a chatbot, it will be transferred to a human service agent.
Chatbots are also used as virtual assistants. Apple, Amazon, Google and Microsoft all have forms of virtual assistants. Apps, such as Apple's Siri and Microsoft's Cortana, or products, like Amazon's Echo with Alexa or Google Home, all play the part of a personal chatbot.
